---
layout: single
title: multi posts
date: '2021-05-04T09:55:00.001-08:00'
author: frances
tags:
modified_time: '2021-05-04T13:13:14.240-08:00'
---

11/20/20  On anxiety and uncertainty vs agnosticism
====
I was feeling anxious at the decision before me (to keep my kid in daycare during a 2-week stay-at-home order due to a covid19 surge, or to take her out as many other parents were doing). I hadn’t had a chance all day to sit down and catch up on the latest research and statistics, so I was in a state of impotent anxiety. (It was mostly an embodied feeling -- shoulders hunched,  stomach churning -- my mind, on the other hand, was fairly free of worried conscious thoughts)
When I got to training, I mentioned trying to cope with uncertainty. My teacher had a great response: “let’s try to find some certainty right now, in relationship to gravity.” And in short order, I felt a good deal more balanced and connected through my postural system to the ground -- through my heels, through my sitz bones. I was literally more grounded.

And that feeling of space opening up in my body -- more certainty in relationship to the surfaces I was contacting, less contracting in my shoulders -- gave my emotions more space to diffuse.

A nice analogy I came up with (not sure if others have come up with it) is that emotions are like gas -- put them under pressure in a heated box, and they’ll bounce all over the place, even if you don’t recognize their effects consciously.  But if you skillfully expand yourself -- literalyl in terms of your body parts moving in space away from each other as they lessen their contractions, as well as holistically in the Alexander sense of the ‘self’, then it gives space for the gas to lose energy, slow down, dissipate. 

Now here’s where agnosticism comes in, in a two-fold way:

  one aspect of giving your emotions space is a certain agnosticsm towards them. Yes, they are experientially true. But will they last? Will you look back on them or justified or disproportionate?  Would you be having the same response if you had more self-mastery? Who knows! 

And another is this: with skill, you can let your anxiety morph into a calmer agnosticism

Self-compassion as merely common-sense
====
As I come to have greater self-perception, I also come to realize you easily the exertion of my alexander technique skills -- the inputs of inhibition and direction -- can be interfered with by my day to day state.  Ate something wrong and have a tummy ache? Didn’t get enough sleep? Worried about something? All these little things can greatly affect how much results my efforts produce. I’m getting better and better at connecting the dots between interfering events and being ‘off my game’.  It’s like being a rider of a very skittish and sensitive horse; your skill level remains the same, but sometimes it’s outside your control if your horse gets spooked by a loud noise, or eats some green apples, etc. My “horse” is easily thrown off course when it comes to the Alexander Technique, and I can feel how it’s outside my control, and so I know it’s OK to be forgiving of my mount -- forgiving of myself -- because I have experiential proof of how it’s outside of my control -- I only have control over my inputs: my skill in inhibiting and directing, my commitment to those processes even when it feels like my thoughts are foggy or my horse is just 100% not responding.

In that context of increased skill of self perception (of my embodied emotions, of wellness vs not-wellness), self-compassion is not so much an exalted spiritual state but a pragmatic reaction of a skilled rider towards their sensitive animal. Dear horse -- you’re spooked today. We’ll work on the training process but we won’t expect any jumps today, and I promise you, if we carry on in this fashion today, tomorrow you’ll be feeling better.

And of course, all this is generalizable. No, I don’t feel like cleaning the kitchen today: I have a DEEP antipathy toward it in fact. THat’s ok. I don’t need to beat myself up. I have faith that tomorrow morning I’ll have the energy and the willingness to clean (though my poor spouse would prefer it if I were so inspired more often! He does more than his fair share of the dishes)

11/19/19 Shoulder pain
====

I need to celebrate this: for the past month or so, I’ve had almost no shoulder pain doing chairwork (or any work) in A.T. training class! I can scarely believe it! I think I’d resigned myself to grappling with this pain for the next 4 years or so. But it just...dissolved away. At first, I thought maybe I was ‘cheating’ in some other way as to avoid triggering the pain but still engaging in some other habit. But then I had a day where I came in all out of sorts and experienced the shoulder pain, and realized -- no, this is something that I’ve worked my way out of (and can slide back into occasionally).  Waaaahooooo!!!!!!

I also feel like being mindful is getting easier and easier in certain daily life circumstances. I guess we can build habits of redirection and inhibition around specific actions! For example I’m pretty sure that every time I stand up, I think my directions (and I feel like standing up is going pretty well these days). Every time I pick up my infant son, I think my directions (though here, I inhibit less often because well, babies are time-sensitive and demanding).  I used to feel like trying to inhibit and direct in daily life took waaay too long, or that I just beat myself up about ‘trying to do it/making things happen instead of letting them’, or thinking thoughts over and over, but knowing the result didn’t feel productive. Now, the thoughts and their results come more quickly and easily. Amazing! On the other hand, I’m reminded that there are some things around which I have ZERO inhibition habits. Case in point: speaking. I thought I’d try for a week to observe the quality of the exhale before speaking  (ribs free? Going up through the inhale?). Guess what. I managed it maybe once? The instinct to respond immediately in conversation is STRONG, especially with a toddler. (oh and...my poor 3.5 yr old toddler is already starting to slouch and adopt harmful postural behaviors. I don’t think I can prevent it, any more than I could prevent her from learning English by speaking only German to her; it’s in the air of our culture. Still, makes me sad. 

Oh, and another thing -- I think my shoulders are finally changing in a major way. Previously whenever I tried to unhunch my shoulders, I just triggered pain elsewhere. Now, I have thoughts about up along the front/down along the backs of my arms, thoughts about the lats and how they fit into not pinching in my armpits; thoughts about spirals and elbow directions, thoughts about thumb and pinky directions, that DON’T seem to trigger pain and do seem to be resulting in less hunched shoulders in every day life. And Karen has been remarking that she can take my arms above my head farther and more easily than ever before. This is also amazing. Because whenever Karen used to ‘settle’ my shoulders so they were hanging off my collar bones (rather than being ‘held up’ and hunched), I would feel immense physical relief and emotional freedom..and also frustration that I knew this state would be so fleeting and that I wouldn’t be able to have this experience on my own. Now, I’m getting closer to having the experience on my own! 

7/25/19
====
In early 2019, I was feeling some doubts about how I could ever make progress, espeically with shoulder and hip pain. What were the limits of my training, and how much were to do with only coming 2 days a week vs limits of the techinque itself in the face of my strong habits?

After the conversations about pain (see previous entry) though, I sensed a turning point in my thinking. I started to have real hope that one day, I can be much more active without being limited by joint pain. I still remember stating something to that effect in training (on a day when I felt for the 1st time that Karen and I together could manage/control my shoulder pain more reliability) and Jamie teared up a bit, because she said she’d spent most of her life being very immobile/static/inactive because she would injure herself every time she got more active. It was a powerful moment, to think we could both change our trajectories.

 In terms of training, I also got to do a number of 3-day weeks and really felt like they helped.  I started to be able to complete chair procedures with low or fluctuating shoulder pain, which was a real sign of progress. And I started to feel some major shifts in my right hip (which seem to be sticking around?) It’s amazing how you can work and work at stuff that feels really subtle, and meanwhile there’s a huge bodily parameter (ie hip) that’s waaaay out of wack but you don’t sense it...until suddenly you do! It kinda feels like, I don’t know if this paleontologist metaphor works, on the one hand you are digging up tiny dino jawbones by working with a toothpick and a toothbrush, carefully unveiling some tiny outlines over weeks and months, and then one day,  3 feet over from you there is a sudden cave-in and 10 feet of dirt fall in and reveal a huge dino femur. Or something like that.  It’s not a learning curve I’d expected with A.T. given the talk of unified self and all body parts connected to each other -- I guess I thought it would be more uniform, or that improvements in 1 part of the body would “automatically’ result in improvements in other body parts without me noticing (which may be true but...maybe more like they result in enough perception that I can suddenly see habits I couldn’t previously perceive)


It can be so hard to find concrete measures of progress with A.T. for me (and probably for others -- probably a big reason our teacher tells us to celebrate small successess). So here are some that are really, really encouraging signs:

-I went to visit my parents in C.T. and swam about 20 minutes several days a week. With low or no shoulder pain! I know for a fact that taking long breaks from swimming, then returning to it, always resulted in icky shoulder and neck pain, so this is not about having taken a break from it or easing into it or doing less than I have done in the past. This is a REAL difference. Yay! I credit the ‘dino bone mudslide moment’ with my hip for that. 

-I survived a 12-hr plane trip day with felix in the front in a carrier and a heaaavvvy backpack, and I really felt...fine. No sciatic pain, no shoulder pain, and the next day, still fine! 


11/16/18
====
End of 1st semester (really, half semester for me) reflections:
First half of the semester, I felt I was on a fast learning curve, felt pleased with myself and that Karen and Sam were pleased with me. 2nd half, persistent shoulder pain in any sort of monkey stan or sitting ding position when doing any sort of arm work, started to discourage me, as did the fact that I experience mild pain on the bike in my left knee still. But as W.Carrington says, the goal shouldn’t be freedom from pain but rather ease and suppleness of movement or something like that. And I do think I’ve made good progress. Some markers:
Almost never pinch and experience pain in the front of hip when I bend forward in primary in the chair. The other day had stressful work day, unusually so, and next morning, I pinched in hip and realized how unusual that was.
In my chair turns, often I don’t feel exhausted. Instead, I feel like I can do what Karen asks, and she gives me more positive feedback than I used to get.
I learned totally new thoughts with arm spirals and leg spirals that put me on a new path. 
I progressed w specific games like fetal frog, looking side to side while prone, looking up while prone, even hands on back of chair. More skill for sure.
A couple times when I was irritable w J, I remembered the convo with Karen (don’t work on the faulty thoughts that are making you irritable 1st, work on your primary control 1st), did so, and felt less irritable in the moment! Also remember FM’s observation that you can get irritable observing others’ poor use if YOUR use is poor!
I practice my AT thoughts in specific situations more often, like doing dishes, getting out of bed, looking as I steer the car. I think my monkeys in everyday life are improving.
I don’t often feel a HUGE difference in myself before/after training on a given day...maybe because I’m more up in general?


11/14/18 Book review of “thinking Aloud”
====

Book Review Instructions:
Write a review for other trainees, explaining:
In what ways are the book and author related to the AT?
Walter Carrington was introduced to AT through his mother taking lessons, graduated FM’s course in 1939, served as a fighter pilot in WWII & broke bones including pelvis (pain + 3 operations in 1970s), joined FM’s training course as a teacher, continued it w/ 3 other teachers on FM’s death (incl. His wife Dilys). As of 1980s, Constructive Teaching Centre in London graduated ~300 teachers. Carrington’s teaching methods were extremely influential (flexible, respectful of questioning) as was his huge A.T. library (for FM biographers). Died 2005 @90. BTW, it’s a different carrington that was an American ambassador to Nigeria in 1980s!
Give an overview of the book’s style and structure.
Very valuable to read the intro, which explains the structure: transcritions of Carrington’s lectures at the training course, which were recorded and circulated unofficially until Carrington was persuaded to allow them in a book w/ curation. Your expectations get set by: “Third years would hang on every word’ and ‘these talks are 1 of my top AT influences’ and ‘the simplicity of speech actually signals extremely sophisticated/deep thinking’. 
And it is very colloquial, very simple, but very deep.
What type of info is shared?
TEACHER ADVICE: What you’re doing as a teacher and what NOT doing. ‘Spinal twists’ -- doing end gain by getting the student laterally symmetrical. Trust that 
P41: the indirect way is givin the most careful consideration to all the idfferent factors involved and then working along that line in the confidence that as you do the problem will gradually crystallize out more and more until a point where it dissolves and solves itself’.


Taking someone up at the hips bodily is not engaining, it’s giving them an experience they are too weak to have themselves
If someone seems free at the neck but is stuck at the hips (DISCUSSION: I didn’t know this was possible -- to SEEM free at neck but be totally stuck elsewhere?), then obviously they are not free.
3 primary things (DISCUSSION: are they in order of importance?)
1. P 49: ‘work is on yourself as a teacher. The approach to the pupil is the approach of finding out, and the chagnes come during that exploration’
2. Persuading student active participation required (emphasize baby steps toward inhibition in standing up in 1st lesson for example). 
How to be nonaggressive in hands and in language.
For beginning students, directions  can be taken as criticism/invitation to anxiety/doing. Inhibition also requires being quite calm.so focus on inhibition, an 
3. Make transforming the breathing a PRIMARYgoal. (not fix their aching hip)
Lengthening is easily understood by teacher (and you can end gain around it), widening is much harder to understand, and is not narrowing, not fixing the breath.
THOUGHTS ON MEANINGS OF DIRECTIONS
MISUNDERSTOOD/DIFFICULT POINTS
P86: “issue of simplicity and complexity can be seen in the way people in our work subscribe to two different schools of thought. There are some people who say that as long as you free your neck and direct your head forward and up, you just have to think or worry about antying else….there are other people who take a vastly more complicated view and they say that what you’ve got to do is inhibit bercause stopping and inhibiting is the most important thing of all…[then] you’ve got to think out the means whereby...all the actions and all the rprocesses and bits and pieces that are involved….the head and neck gets forgotton about [as primary focus of attention] and lost in all the complexity and comes in for occasional attention.” (conclusion: I think WC was saying you need both -- but primary attention to head/neck)
A CENTRAL chapter: “the demand of the constant’:
Even though you have experience of unity of self as a student/teacher, doesn’t mean you understand it, and many teachers still separate mind/body talking to their students. We have the demand of constantly reaction to life and to gravity, and poor use is NOT MAKING CHOICES when we have the capability to do so as non-machines/primitive organisms (not even getting to quality of choices). ‘Be sure you preserve mental and emtional poise and balance, because otherwise you won’t be able to keep physical pose and balance’...’what we are aiming at is consistency, because our reaction to gravity, and our transactions life, must have the same constant aspect [ie neck free]...’it has the first claim on your thought and attention all the time. If you find that boring and restricting...you haven’t taken the trouble to think in terms of expansio nand growth and development...in fact it does make life easier’
THOUGHTS ON SENSORY APPRECIATION
Why not to rely on feeling: if you are asking, ‘is my neck free?’ you have an undercurrent of fear/anxiety/stiffening/doubt all the time b/c you can never truely know. (though totally valid to apply that question to a student) So instead stoke up your strong desire (which takes STRONG will) to want a free neck/free way of being. 
BREATHING
Elaborate whispered ‘ah’ procedure.
Who is the preferred audience for the book? Students, Trainees, Teachers?
Trainees and teachers
How could this be used as a resource for your teaching practice?
How has this book inspired you?


Present your review in class, using inhibition and direction.
Lead a short interactive presentation based on something you want to explore from the book or inspired by the book.



11/8/18 Practice in everyday life
====

Haha, of course emotions change all the time. Lately I feel a tad frustrated, like, I’m on a plateau and my darn shoulder pain continues (as does mild knee pain when biking). BUT there are so many little victories and learning moments I need to stop and savor. Well, I will. But first, need to write up what will become a blog post per Karen’s request:
So we were talking about how it can be exhausting to practice at in everyday life, if you are not honoring the process. But, at the same time, you know the more you engage in the process in every day life, the better off you will be. So how to takle practice in every day life in a pragmatic way?  For me, it can look like different options:
A). You stop and inhibit and take your time constantly as you would in training course. This can get impractical if you are doing it all the time. But, if done in a spirit of willing curiosity (not self-flagellation) it can definitely be a good learning practice. For me, it needs to be tied to very specific circumstances so I rememer to do it. For example, I decided, “this week I’m going to focus on the process while turning my head.” I never remembered to do it. So then I thought, “I’ll do the process when I turn my head while in the kitchen.” Still forgot. Then I thought, “I’ll do the process while standing at the sink and loading th edishwasher.” OK. Now I finally start to remember.
B) The worst option, and the most tempting: have a shorthand for your AT thoughts that is ACTUALLY just feeling the thoughts. And, throughout the day, feel yourself going wrong and immediately adjust till you feel right.  In The Universal Constant of Living, FM said something to the effect that we think far less often than we feel we do. So true. This option is pernious and extremely hard to break. But, it’s essential to do so. I think a couple ways to do so are:
Add a little extra layer to your thoughts so that you are reminded not to cheat and do/feel them. For example, vocalize them in your head. Or add a visual, like light beams or rainbows or smoke swirling out of your body and into the room in the A.T. directions. 
Distinguish between wanting to check in with your body sensations to see if you are inhibiting and directing in a way that FEELS RIGHT, and instead, explore a type of checking that relies on external feedback (the ground, the mirror, gravity) to help you gauge your directions. As Sam said, feeling is not the problem — wanting to feel right is. And as Karen said, external sensation feedback from walls, mirrors, etc, is great — the problem is when you get too specific, and too caught up in analyzing specific internal sensations. For me, there is a sort of ineffable bodily sensation I associate with lengthening and directing that is changeable, but feels different from contraction or doing. And I feel like I can take my directions, and then do a quick compare — i said I wanted to direct down the back of my legs, but is there actually a contracting direction up the back of my legs compared to the ground? If so, can I let that go to direct down? And I accept that whatever sensentaion comes next, might be changeable and might not be different from the original contraction —- but I have some faith that the the thought and the external feedback may have made a difference beyond my current perception. Now, I may be on dangerous ground here with all of this paragraph, comments welcome!
C) Think your thoughts really quickly, and DONT check in with your sensensations or external feedback like mirrors, surfaces, etc. Just trust that the thought maybe made a difference. This one is REALLY hard for me. It feels like cheating or the easy way out, but it is actually takes incredible self disciple (albeit, less time). And, I don’t know if this method is the one that is truest to the process, because external sensation and feedback are very important parts of the process too. Thoughts?


9/17/18 Only about a month into the training
====


Feeling pretty confident and positive these days after a rough two weeks of shoulder pain at the beginning (brought on by laptopping while lying down, which I’m guilty of now). Karen and Sam (my co-trainee) are both quite complimentary -- I’ll get a big head!
Couple experiences:
-I experimented w/ releasing heel to ground and felt my walk became much less gimpy/symmetrical! But then I unknowingly end-gained by seeking the feeling of symmetry, and in the end my R knee (unusual! Usually L knee) hurt. Then I recognized the end-gain, and now I just try to focus on releasing the heels while walking, not with an ‘end’ in mind
-I think I found examples of myself ‘feeling it out’, which can still be fuzzy for me. (in talks w/ Karen: sometimes noticing a feeling as a means to remind us of a habit is OK but don’t RELY on the feeling to notify you of the habit or even completely trust that the feeling means you’re doing the habit). 
I thought that ‘back from the ankles’ meant sensing my weight in the back of my heels. Nope! You might not even be able to tell where your weight on your feet is when you come back from ankles, as I showed myself when I focused more on letting knees go out and away
Relatedly, I started ‘feeling out’ my back to suss if I was lifting my arms well, or shortening in my back, and shifting weight to back of heels was part of that. For a couple days I kept trying (successfully) to recapture that experience. Now Im like, nope! Not gonna try! AND for once -- I didn’t feel sad about that or tempted. I felt relieved that I have a better way -- the directions way. FINALLY getting to point where I want to stop ‘feeling it out’ instead of just wanting to want to stop ‘feeling it out’. :) Maybe I should be looking in mirror instead! Or gauging my head against nearbye surfaces.
Maybe a difference between a ‘feeling’ and a ‘direction’ is that a ‘feeling’ comes and goes and changes and is sort of directly noticeable . A ‘direction’ for me is more of an IMAGINARY feeling +with an ineffable quality to it -- well except that coming up in front in my torso can be VERY strong muscle effort and not so ‘ineffable!’


8/20/18 Why do I want to start the teacher training?
====

Why do I want to start the AT teacher training? It’s such a serious commitment, one that is especially difficult considering I have a demanding career (even part time), a toddler, childcare expenses, and the joint responsibility of running a home. 
But it’s something I’ve wanted to do for the last 10 years, ever since I was introduced to AT by Annamarie Broekhuizen at the Conservatory of Amsterdam. What do I hope to get out of it? I’ll break it down by categories, even though I recognize the fallacy of dividing physical/emotional/etc.


HIP TRAUMA
7 years ago, I tore the labrum in my right hip, and 5 years ago, I had surgery to repair it. It’s been a long recovery and at times I’ve doubted if I’d ever walk 2 miles again without pain.
Now, I very much hope to be able to hike long distances without left knee pain/right hip pain; swim without left shoulder pain; avoid the left-neck/shoulder pain that creeps up in times of stress. Generally speaking, I want to exist daily with dwelling in the trauma reflex (as described by http://essentialsomatics.com/hanna-somatics-articles-case-studies/three-somatic-reflexes ) left by the hip injury. A dream would be to run again, even if only for 2 miles twice a week.

BREATH/SHOULDERS
I feel like I’ve already gained a lot more freedom from hip tension than I thought possible over the course of 3 years of private lessons in ABQ. But I’m very much mystified by my breath/shoulders (and probably head/neck, if I had better awareness!)
I would love -- LOVE -- to breathe more freely, and to be liberated from the shoulder tension I carry with me; the hunched-forward, down-in-front posture I cannot at present tackle without inducing ‘doing’ and should pain.  Whenever I experience free breathing under my teacher’s guidance, or feel a shoulder/upper back release, it’s enough to make me very greedy for the emotional lightness and release from subliminal tension/pain.


RESOLUTION OF PAST MUSICAL CRISIS
I had a crisis in conservatory over ‘breath control’ as a flutist. The year before I entered conservatory, I found a flute teacher, Gretchn Pusch, whose teacher was Julius Baker. Her teachings in retrospect were perfectly compatible with A.T. -- she taught to avoid engaging ‘support’ or fooling with the breath, and instead focused on maintaining ‘good posture’ and controlling the air stream at the lips and with the shape of the interior mouth. She taught that inhaling was all about specific lip actions to allow the air in and set up the embouchure for the exhale. With her, I felt as if I were bypassing difficulties of ‘support’ that had formerly plagued me; everything started to get easier, and I finally felt my technique was on more solid footing!
 
Then I went to conservatory, and faced conflicting approaches: I started with an A.T. teacher, who was affirming what Gretchen had taught me. But, my main teacher advocated a very ‘abdominal muscular’ approach to ‘support’, vibrato, and breath that, in the end, led me to experience extreme performance anxiety and leave school (I felt my technique was crumbling underneath me; I couldn’t please her and stay sane. Nor did I ultimately want to please her -- I actually came to realize I didn’t like her playing!)
 All this has probably left me with some trauma around the ‘technique’ of breathing. It would be very interesting to let that go while playing a breath-supported instrument or while singing (I have a constricted, small singing voice, partly due to my experiences in a children’s choir in which a ‘pure’ but thin voice was modeled to us).  But that wouldn’t be the central goal -- central goal is simply to breath well.
All this has also left me with some trauma around A.T. itself! In extremis at conservatory, I beat myself up for lacking the skill to ‘save’ my technique and my conservatory career through A.T. (this is after 2 semesters of lessons!)  I read many A.T. books, and felt anxiety and sadness at how far I was from the ideals I read about.
I’ve learned to be kinder to myself since then, and recognize that ‘in extremis’ is not the best place from which to make the slow, subtle, kind changes A.T. involves. (but that also, there are other tools available to me in extremis). I’ve gained more confidence in my ability to learn the Technique over the years, and forgive myself for not experiencing as quickly the amazing transformations I’ve read about in others’ accounts. Given all the effort (much misdirected, no doubt) and thought I’ve put into A.T. over the last 10 years as a sporadic private student, it would be very satisfying to gain a very solid grounding in the technique.


CONTENTEDNESS
We all habituate to ‘things’ we think will bring us happiness-- and in my experience, physical capabilities are no exception.. I’ve felt overwhelmed with gratitude and happiness at steps in my physical recovery from hip surgery -- then a few years later, take those same strides for granted. So, I might argue to myself, won’t I habituate to whatever ease I gain through A.T., and simply take my new use for granted?
I mentioned this thought to Karen, and she had an interesting response about how A.T. makes one generally more content and aware in life. And awareness is maybe something that one can’t ‘habituate’ to, precisely because it means you’re paying attention! Anyway, being more content, more free to make choices, sounds very worthwhile

CAREER
Do I want to be a teacher?  It’s a very interesting question. When I was a music student, I was very hard on myself, and when I attempted to teach music, I was even harder, and felt overwhelmed by the impossibility of getting a student from beginner to even intermediate.  I felt very anxious and unhappy teaching private lessons, and stopped quickly. As a fresh college grad, I taught SAT prep on the side, and found I was exhausted by the social demands of classroom teaching and tutoring. 
I knew that if I wanted to be a professional musician, I would have to teach -- but it was through repeated experience I decided teaching was NOT for me.  
But A.T. is a totally different educational paradigm; maybe I could discover that I enjoy teaching the pursuit of non-doing and welcoming the unfamiliar. 
I would certainly welcome the chance to maintain my skill through teaching -- that might even be the prime motivator for me to establish a private practice. 



HOPES FOR HAPPY SIDE EFFECTS
Ever since my  extreme stress during conservatory, I’ve been prone to heartburn and find I must generally avoid onions and eat only small quantities of bread, garlic, and beans (basically, a light version of the FODMAPS diet). Even so, a hearburn attack usually leaves me listless and miserable once or twice a year. 
Maybe improved digestion would be a happy byproduct of teacher training.
Another might be to let go of my night-time mouthguard; I’ve been grinding my teeth in my sleep since I was a teen.

 
END-GAINING DESIRES
I can’t end this post without acknowledging that I have a secret, vain ambition to have ‘beautiful posture’ and ‘move well’ -- to ‘look like’ the rare people who catch my eye on the street because their use of self is so unusually good. It’s a very end-gaining desire. I probably need to acknowledge fully to myself and let go of it to truly learn A.T.!


Some random notes from a  sept 2018 class
====

-right knee pressing out is connected to sacrum narrowing in back BUT
-left elbow pushing out is connected to down in L neck/narrow across FRONT of chest!

clarifying pull to elbows + up in front:
if you're not digging into flor in front or w/ arms, and you let up in front preceed elbow pull (elbow pull almost a consequence of up in front) then you get a pull along the floor in opposite directions that feels very clear

-1st thru fetal frog
-then thru side to side looking in prone (this one is espeically useful and DO set up something to be curious about like a picture or noise-maker)
-then w/ forams+palms on floor looking straight up
-finally (not ready) w/ only palms on floor under shoulders
*this pull to elbow on floor didn't hurt my right shoulder! YAY!

then an intermediate step to getting to that same elbow pull + up in front is to slide hands+forearms along a table while sitting, noting the friction of table on palm; also try w/ holding a lightweight box w/ fingers flat and palms facing eachother










